I think it's easy to understand why most of us don't want to think about death. It's an almost impossible thing to contemplate. Death is inevitable, but what I don't think is inevitable is that we spend the final decade of our life in such a state of decline that we fail to enjoy the activities we love and being with the people we love.

We have agency. We don't get to choose when or how we die, but we get to choose how we live. It is true that there are many factors that determine how long you live and how well you live.

Some of those factors are out of your control. Your genes, and quite frankly, sometimes just luck. But more of these factors are in your control than you realise, and our goal in this series is to focus on the things that we can control.

I realise that there are probably people out there who think that the word longevity itself conjures up images of, you know, sort of bro science and biohacking and things of that nature, and there's good reason to feel that way. On the news and in the media, it makes for sexy headlines, and that's what a lot of the information we are fed about longevity tends to focus on. It's for that very reason that I kind of don't like the word longevity, and I think the better way to think about this is that it's really about the principles of what we call lifespan and healthspan.

In other words, it doesn't just matter how long you live. What matters is how well you live, and that healthspan element needs to be managed just as rigorously as you would manage the lifespan component. And so taken together, to me, this really isn't about pseudoscience.

It's actually quite rigorously about science, and what the science very clearly tells us is that there are four diseases that ultimately kill you. I call them the four horsemen of death. The good news is that you can identify which horsemen you may be prone to, then assess the risks you have, address those risks, and then build a lifelong action plan to combat them.

It's easiest to start with what Medicine 1.0 is, and Medicine 1.0 is what we practised for most of our existence. Essentially for the first 250,000 years, we didn't understand the scientific method. We didn't understand the laws of nature, and I think most people would agree that the world is an infinitely better place today than it would have been 100 or 200 years ago based on the scientific advances that led to what I now call Medicine 2.0. The form of medicine that I learned in med school focused on treating diseases instead of preventing them, but it has largely plateaued because we have sort of hit the limits of what that playbook can achieve.

Medicine 2.0 basically addresses the disease once it's here, and in many cases, that's too late. And so it's really here that we need a new playbook, and that new playbook is what I've described as Medicine 3.0. It's a proactive, data-driven, and personalised framework that is focused not just on treating disease but on preventing it before it appears. And in this class, I'm going to take you through exactly how you do this.

I think it's one thing to sit here and listen to me talk about this stuff, but I think a far more powerful tool for people to realise what they can do is to meet other real people who are here to share their own personal journey with managing their health proactively around the four horsemen of chronic disease. What motivates me is I want to be able to hang out with my children after they're retired. In my older age, at the final stage of my life, I still want to be able to travel with my wife, explore the whole world together.

It is very important for me to prevent all the conditions that my family is known for having. I never want to be in that predicament. Everybody's story is different.

Everybody's motivation is different. But ultimately, everybody had to make the decision to take that first step toward making smarter, better decisions about safeguarding their futures, not just for themselves, but for everyone who is important in their lives. We're going to distil all these ideas for you across three episodes.

In part one of this series, we're going to learn about all the foundational knowledge you need to extend your health span and lifespan. In part two, we get more specific touching on factors like sleep and nutrition. And in part three, we get super focused on exercise and demonstrate what you can do right now to get started on your longevity journey, no matter what fitness level you're at.

We've also created a downloadable class guide that not only covers many of the key insights from the series, but also provides extra resources, including weekly exercise plans and much more. Whether you've been following me for more than a decade or you've never heard of me until today, this series represents what I believe is going to be a wonderful distillation that will serve you on your journey to improve both the length and quality of your life. I'm Dr. Peter Atiyah, author of Outlive, host of The Drive podcast, founder of Early Medical.

And this is Masterclass. One of the most common questions I get asked, especially when I'm speaking with people over the age of 65 or 70 is, hey, is this simply too late for me? And I think the most important thing I would kind of communicate to that person is, look, your lifespan and healthspan are much more malleable than you think. An analogy might be that of how a glider travels through the air.

And if you imagine that a glider, once it reaches the tops of the trees, is tantamount to us reaching the end of our life, the question becomes how high can we get the glider while we're in the middle part of our life to give us even more of a runway, such that as the inevitability of gravity brings us down, we get to travel further and further. And of course, the ideal time to do that is not while you're staring at the trees coming straight at you, but rather while the trees are still far enough below. And what we want to be able to do is get onto sort of a warm patch of wind and let it lift us up.

And of course, what that represents is all of the things that we can do for our health while we still have it. It's the fact that a person in their 50s who's not that healthy can be considerably healthier by the time they're in their 60s. And they can, so to speak, raise that glider up such that they have a longer and longer runway until it inevitably does come down.

The first concept you must understand are biomarkers and why they are important for longevity. Every one of you, I'm sure, has gone to the doctor and had a blood test and you've received those results. Those are biomarkers.

Biomarkers are measurable indicators of how your body is functioning. One of the most common misconceptions people have is that biomarker necessarily implies blood-based biomarker. The reality of it is some of the most important biomarkers are functional.

For example, every time you stand on a scale, you're getting a piece of information about your body. And so in that sense, your body weight also serves as a biomarker. A strength test would also serve as a biomarker.

If I asked you how many push-ups or pull-ups you could do, that would provide me information about the state of your body. Here are some of the things that simple strength tests can tell us about our overall health. One of the most interesting tests of strength is something that people, I think, initially look at and sort of scoff, and it's grip strength.

There is a benefit in absolute terms from having high grip strength. High grip strength, by definition, implies high upper body strength. Everything up the chain of your arm has to be strong if your grip is strong.

And that comes with some surprising benefits. For example, your risk of falling goes down. You have far more reactivity, far more ability to protect yourself as you fall, which again, if you're listening to this and you're 30 years old, you might be thinking, who cares? But if you're listening to this and you're 60 years old, you care all too well.

So that would be a couple of examples of why knowing something as simple as your grip strength is an enormous aid as you start to think about your health. So here's a simple exercise to assess your grip strength. A dead hang is, as its name suggests, hanging from a bar and doing nothing else.

Now, there are metrics for what would constitute a really long hang. And for a 40-year-old male, being able to hang for about two minutes would be considered really, really good. And for a 40-year-old female, being able to hang for about a minute and a half would be viewed as really, really good.

Of course, people can hang for longer than that. And the longer you hang, the stronger you are. If I had a person do a dead hang and they could only go for 30 seconds, I know that in a week, they're not going to be able to hang for two minutes.

But I know in six months, they will be able to if they train for it properly. And it's that act of training for it that represents what we care about. It's the work that they've done in that process that is bringing them all the benefit.

And this is why a dead hang is important. It informs longevity in a variety of ways. Now, even if you know all of the biomarkers about an individual, you still don't know every detail of their health as it would pertain to helping them avoid the pitfalls of ageing.

For example, not knowing a person's family history will create a blind spot by not allowing you to understand some of their genetic risks that otherwise don't show up in even a genetic test. If I spend 20 minutes with a patient and they have access to their parents and they can get wonderful information about the nature of how their parents lived or potentially died and how their grandparents lived and died and how their aunts and uncles lived and died, I have a far greater sense of what they're really at risk for than I'll ever be able to conjure up using a genetic test. So my family history is my mother is a diabetic, father, high blood pressure, maternal grandfather, Alzheimer's, dementia.

Both of my grandmothers had breast cancer. My mom had skin cancer and thyroid cancer. So everything I do is try to prevent what happened to my father from happening to me.

He is now suffering from dementia. My uncle had a quintuple bypass when he was in his early 50s. At the time, that seemed old, but 20 years later, I'm catching up to his age that he was then.

So if you're lucky, at least one of your parents is still alive and you're able to call them and maybe get some details from them. And I think the way you want to start talking about that is doing it through a systems-based approach. You can find this checklist in our downloadable class guide.

So in an ideal world, if you can know this for your parents, your four grandparents, your aunts and uncles, and your siblings, you're going to have a pretty complete sense of what is knowable with respect to your genetic risk of disease. So for those of us living in the developed world, there are largely four things that stand in the way of us and living an extremely long life, which are the diseases of atherosclerosis, so heart disease and stroke, metabolic diseases ranging from insulin resistance to type 2 diabetes, cancer, and neurodegenerative and dementing diseases like Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia. I think for me, the term four horsemen really gives us something tangible to think about, almost like an opponent.

Before we dive into the specifics of each chronic disease, I want to highlight one of the most important biomarkers that relates to all of them. It's not genetically inherited, it's not blood-based, and improving it can significantly reduce your risk across all of the horsemen. I'm talking about VO2max.

VO2max is one of the most important biomarkers we have at assessing your risk of mortality because it's an indicator of how well your cardiovascular system is working. Individuals with a strong VO2max have a lower risk of all-cause mortality, and the good news is it's something you can train and improve. So what is it? It's the maximum volume of oxygen a person can use during intense exercise, reflecting their heart health.

You can measure your VO2max with a test that's offered in some gyms, but we'll cover it in greater detail in episode two and explain how you can test yourself at home. So now let's get into each horseman. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States.

It's the leading cause of death globally, and it's the leading cause of death for men and for women. It is still largely, at least in my view, inexcusable that approximately 19 million people a year die worldwide when it comes to a disease that I believe is largely and entirely preventable if we start early enough. So when we think about how to prevent heart disease, we have to understand what it comes down to.

Atherosclerosis is the buildup of cholesterol and other fats in artery walls, triggering an inflammatory response that narrows coronary arteries, restricts blood flow to the heart muscle, and can ultimately lead to a heart attack. It might be tempting to assume that when a person has a heart attack that they were perfectly fine right up until that moment and there was no way of knowing that was going to happen prior to the fact. But the reality of it is if you looked at that person's coronary arteries a day before, a month before, and a year before, you would have seen the problem and you would have been able to have treated it.

The types of coronary artery lesions that kill people are present at least a decade before the event that potentially takes their life. In that sense, you could sort of think of it like a volcano. And when a volcano erupts, it might appear like a sudden thing that happens, just like a plaque rupturing that leads to this injury.

But the truth of the matter is the seismic geologic activity beneath that volcano that ultimately led to the eruption has been going on for many years. Most people are used to looking at their LDL cholesterol as an important biomarker when trying to understand cardiovascular disease. But it turns out there's another biomarker that is significantly more important and it's called ApoB, short for apolipoprotein B. And ApoB is far more predictive of atherosclerosis than just LDL cholesterol.

The LDL cholesterol measurement that the lab reports is a measurement of the total amount of cholesterol contained within the LDL particles. The ApoB measurement, conversely, is telling you the total number of particles that you have in your circulation. The higher the number of particles, the greater the chance a particle breaches the artery wall than it is the amount of cholesterol contained within that particle once it breaches the wall.

It's for that reason that the ApoB is a better predictor than just the LDL cholesterol of atherosclerotic risk. But cholesterol is largely genetically determined. And there's one particular case we need to discuss and call out specifically.

This is a condition that is identifiable in about 1 in 10 people. And it is the presence of a particular lipoprotein known as LP little a. LP little a is the worst actor when it comes to causing heart disease. You only need to test LP little a once because it is genetically determined.

If it is elevated, you know it's elevated. If it's not, you know it's not. The majority of people are not getting an ApoB or an LP little a tested.

So it's in fact quite likely that an individual has a completely normal looking panel, even inclusive of ApoB, but they might still be at very high risk. And I've seen a number of cases where people present with very advanced disease despite having a normal ApoB because, and I say normal in quotes, but because these individuals still had an unrecognised threat. So I know that I have high LP little a and that's genetic.

I had read in Dr. Atiyah's book that LP little a can cause irreversible calcification. A lot of things, you know, if you fall off the waggon, you can recover from it. But calcification is notionally a one-way street.

And yeah, I mean that was just very eye-opening. That really, you know, brought back into picture what my uncle had gone through at this point, you know, 20 years ago with his bypass. The decision to use medication to manage ApoB is a decision that must be made with a person's physician.

I will only say again that of the 19 million people who die annually of this disease, it really should be an orphan disease. Of all the horsemen, this is the one that could be completely eliminated if we aggressively managed lipids, blood pressure, and metabolic health. So my wife is a physician and she's been trying to get me to take blood tests for many years.

But I always just put it off. One of those things that didn't seem super critical because I exercise frequently. So I was expecting the blood test results to just say nothing of note.

I mean, this was months after I had run the Chicago Marathon. So, you know, I do a lot of cardio. So I wasn't expecting to see very much.

And the blood test came back and there were a lot of different metrics on the blood work that just were, you know, wildly out of line. My LP little a was 47 and my ApoB was 113. So I walked into my primary care physician's office and I sit down.

I say, so I really think that I need a prescription for statin. I was able to explain the family history and I had brought a printout of all of the blood work that I had done. So six weeks after the statin prescription, I went back for a follow-up appointment.

My total LDL cholesterol was 160 before I started taking the statin. And then in my follow-up visit six weeks later, it was 38. So a massive difference in just six weeks.

I'm just thinking about wanting to be healthy enough to hang out with my kids when they're retired, right? And to do that, it takes effort, but the time to start, right? It's easier to do it now than it would be when I'm 80. And it would have been easier if I had started when I was 25, but I didn't. So, right, just like planting a tree, the best time is 20 years ago and the second best time is today.

Caleb's story is so powerful because it shows how family history can reveal hidden risks. Now he's using that information to make life-changing improvements. It's also important to remember that heart disease is often preventable, genetic predisposition or not.

It just takes a proactive approach. One in three adults in the United States has metabolic syndrome, which is a cluster of conditions that significantly increases the risk of heart disease, stroke, and type 2 diabetes. The good news is that metabolic syndrome is both preventable and reversible.

Two of the most critical interventions are maintaining energy balance and building muscle. Muscle is one of the most important organs when it comes to maintaining metabolic health because muscle is the most important and largest reservoir of glucose. And exercise, both resistance training and cardio training, are an essential part of increasing the sensitivity of the muscles to insulin, a hormone produced by the pancreas that plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar levels.

It's the signal that tells your muscles to take glucose out of your bloodstream. So, the larger your muscle mass, the greater your muscle mass, the greater the capacity you have to dispose of glucose, which is just a fancy way for saying getting glucose out of the circulation where it becomes toxic at high levels and into a place of storage like the muscles. So, your fasting glucose level, the level of glucose that you measure in an individual after an overnight fast, shows how well your body controls blood sugar when you haven't eaten, primarily reflecting whether your liver responds properly to an insulin signal to stop releasing glucose.

Fasting insulin basically tells you how much insulin the pancreas is making at that moment in time in response to whatever glucose is present. So, the healthy state that you want to be in is to have a relatively low fasting glucose and a low fasting insulin. There are some individuals who may present with a high fasting glucose and a high fasting insulin.

And in that situation, you might be looking at a situation of insulin resistance, a condition in which the body cells become less responsive to insulin, meaning more glucose is released into the bloodstream. When the muscles and the liver are insulin resistant, if the problem is not corrected, it's going to get worse and worse and worse until ultimately organs such as the brain, the kidneys, the GI tract, all of these other systems become more and more insulin resistant as you march down towards the path of type 2 diabetes. And if that's happening, then all sorts of things are happening along the way towards developing heart disease, cancer and dementia.

Measuring fasting insulin alongside glucose is more revealing than glucose measurement alone. You can have normal glucose levels for years while your body produces increasingly high and damaging insulin levels to maintain them. There are many things that impact insulin sensitivity.

And when I see a patient who's insulin resistant, I'm going through a checklist in my mind of all the reasons why. One of the first things, believe it or not, that I'm asking is how's their sleep? Because an individual that is not sleeping long enough or not sleeping well enough is going to have a very hard time of addressing insulin resistance, even making corrective measures around diet and exercise. Another thing, of course, I'm asking is how much muscle mass do they have? And we can quantify this by looking at a DEXA scan, a specialised imaging test that can accurately measure body composition, including muscle mass.

We can evaluate a person's muscle mass by addressing where they stack up relative to others on a nomogram. So we could say, you know, this person's at the 10th percentile, meaning 90% of people their sex and their age have more muscle mass. That would not be a great place to be.

The next thing I look at is their state of energy balance. Are they overnourished? Which means are they storing more fat on them than is healthy? So you have three completely seemingly unrelated things that tie together between sleep, exercise and nutrition. And those become the first line of therapy for how to manage insulin resistance, even before we look at pharmaceutical agents that have varying degrees of efficacy as well.

Seeing my parents and what they had to go through for their health definitely got me on a scare because I didn't want to have, you know, just that generational thing. It happened to you, it's going to happen to me. So I really wanted to get ahead of it.

For exercise, I'm doing multiple things. So I do strength training and then I love to dance. So I would do some hip hop fit.

I would join a Zumba class. When I increased my movement, the first benefit I saw was that I wasn't as tired. So I didn't need coffee as much.

So my rest was deeper. I'm dreaming more vividly. I had lost 80 pounds in like four or five months.

If I had diabetes, I think I would be missing out on a sense of health freedom. I think watching my mother go through it because I was the closest person, of course, to me and growing up and watching her go through the checking everything and withdrawing herself from things that she used to love to eat. It's a prison in your own body.

It feels like when you have something like a metabolic disorder. Mina's family history motivated her to take steps to prevent the diseases she knew she's prone to. I do believe that ultimately people need to be taking a little bit more control over their health.

And I think it's especially important for people who are at high risk. So if a person has a family history that's littered with cases of type 2 diabetes, they should probably assume that genetically they're more predisposed to it than somebody whose family history has very little, if any, cases of type 2 diabetes. I think it would be foolish to tell that person, no, we can just wait until your haemoglobin A1C reaches the pre-diabetic level before we do anything about it.

18 million people are currently living in the United States with cancer. I think there are lots of risks associated with aggressive screening. But I think we also have to acknowledge that not screening is not going to yield better outcomes pending the arrival of new drugs that have greater efficacy against cancer than we've seen to date.

There's lots to be optimistic around here. But the truth of the matter is our best defence against cancer is catching it early. And there's no ambiguity about this point.

A person with stage 3 cancer being treated with a given regimen might have a survival of 50 to 60 or 70 percent. Whereas that same person treated with the exact same drug cocktail for the same type of tumour would expect to have basically a 0 percent long-term survival if that cancer has already spread. So we have to ask ourselves the question, what do we need to do to better increase our odds of surviving cancer? Step one is don't get it.

What's in our control? Avoiding the things that are known to cause cancer. And right now there are two really big obvious associations with cancer, smoking and metabolic syndrome. But the second half of that playbook has to be around early detection.

So what exactly is cancer? Cancer is a complex interplay of genetics, environment and chance. It is a disease that develops when normal cells acquire genetic mutations. These mutations result in two properties that separate cancer cells from non-cancerous cells.

The first of these properties is that cancer cells do not respond to normal cell cycle signalling. If I cut my arm, the cells in the region have to start replicating and growing and reproducing. But those cells know once the repair is done to stop growing.

Unfortunately, cancer cells lose that capacity. When they're given the signal to stop growing, they're deaf to it. The second property of cancer cells is the ability to spread, to leave their site of origin and move to a totally distinct area.

So the five cancers for which there are formal recommendations around screening are lung cancer in high-risk individuals, which is people who are current or past smokers, breast cancer via the use of mammography, colorectal cancer with the use of colonoscopy, cervical cancer with the use of a pap smear, and only in high-risk individuals the use of PSA or prostate cancer. So just like nobody has a heart attack overnight, and the system has been brewing for many years, the same is largely true with cancer, although it's probably less clear as to exactly what the period of time is between that very first cell gone rogue and the development of a clinically discoverable cancer. But we suspect that that process takes many years.

So in 2023, I was diagnosed with stage 1A melanoma. It started out as a red spot on my chest that came up like seven years prior. And so I went to the doctor for it at that time when it popped up, and they had said, oh, it's nothing.

So they sent me home. So I just left it, and I ignored it for a while until it started changing and bleeding. But my husband's an oncologist, and that was how it was caught early, because he noticed.

He knew the signs of when it was going to turn into cancer. So when they did the biopsy, the doctor called me, and the first thing that she said was, so we got the results back, and it was cancer. Then so I asked her, so what kind of cancer? And she said melanoma.

And I just froze because I didn't think that that could happen to me at such a young age. I was only about 30, 34. And at the time it was caught, it was stage 1A, which is treatable.

If I had just been left to my own devices, I think I wouldn't be so lucky. Mandy's story is one example of how important in life-saving early detection is. Again, this is why a proactive approach is key when assessing our health.

Nearly 7 million Americans today are suffering from Alzheimer's disease, a number that is expected to double by 2060. But doctors today, specifically neurologists, are much better at making these diagnoses earlier than they used to be. And we now realise that even within Alzheimer's disease, there are kind of different subtypes that present differently, and potentially, we believe, might ultimately respond to different types of therapy.

So when we think about cognitive health, we might think of things like short-term memory, long-term memory, executive function, odour detection. Different types of dementing diseases can rob an individual of different components, but Alzheimer's disease is the most common neurodegenerative disease and also the most common dementing disease. Only 1% of the cases of Alzheimer's disease appear to be genetically pre-programmed.

And while genetics play a role in the development of a significant subset of the other 99%, none of those cases appear predetermined. In other words, it appears that we have much more agency over Alzheimer's disease than previously thought. There is a biomarker that many people are aware of when it comes to understanding your risk of Alzheimer's disease, and it's a gene known as the ApoE gene.

Now, we all have two copies of this gene, because we got one from our mom and one from our dad, and they're numbered 2, 3, and 4. Now, each of those comes with a different risk. When people loosely talk about an Alzheimer's gene, they're usually talking about the ApoE4 gene. About 25% of the population carry at least one copy of it, most commonly with a 3, so they're a 3, 4. And the 4, 4 is the highest risk combination of this gene pairing.

You can ask your doctor for an ApoE genotype test. But remember, the ApoE4 gene is not deterministic, and a lot is at the disposal of the individual as to how they can modify risk. And we feel quite confident as we take care of patients with these mutations that we can, at a minimum, delay the onset of such a disease until hopefully a point at which more viable treatment options exist.

So my father is a surgeon. He treats breast cancers. He's very well-known, experienced in Taiwan, of course, before he was sick.

And he's got an established career, but ironically, he treats everyone by himself. I started to notice a decline in his mid-50s, and that's when I noticed that he couldn't handle the bills properly in the restaurant, couldn't even do the simple addition calculation properly. And things lead to more and more suspicions when I figure out that he couldn't even read the calendar clock properly.

Doctors did the medical exam to him, and it turns out that he has dementia. It's a shock. It's a wake-up call for all of us in the family.

My mom, myself, my brother, we started to exercise regularly. We started to eat healthy. We really watch out what we eat.

Good diet, good lifestyle. And my father used to be really busy, so I barely remember any time I spent with him. And when he got sick, of course, I got more and more time to spend with him.

But things are a little different. Every time I see him behaving abnormally, I feel guilty because there's a lot of things I want to talk to my father about. He's my hero.

But it's very sad that I'm talking to a camera right now, that this is something that I wish I could say to my father years and years ago, but I don't have a chance anymore. So, yeah, that's it. Yeah, so that's an emotional toll.

And of course, the reason I changed my lifestyle is because I don't want to get sick. I don't want to be a burden, become a burden for my family. I don't want them to spend their life taking care of me.

Taking care of a family member with a neurodegenerative disease can be devastating, just as Po shared. So what can we do to keep this horseman at bay? As much as I think people would like to believe that doing sudoku and crossword protects your brain, it tends to just make you better at sudoku and crosswords. The brain tends to require more complicated tasks that are using as many senses as possible.

So dancing turns out to be probably a lot better for your brain than doing puzzles. Because with dancing, the body is problem solving in three dimensions. It's addressing movement.

It's having to anticipate what's going on. And that turns out to be much more important. Nothing appears to have a greater impact on reducing the risk or delaying the onset of Alzheimer's disease, as does exercise.

Exercise means putting on as much muscle mass as you can put on, having as high a VO2 max as you can have. I mean, it's really good to use those as things that we hold up to and aspire to, because to achieve those things, you have to do a considerable amount of training. Simply going for a walk every day is not really going to be enough.

It's going to obviously bring with it some benefits. It would be better than sitting on the couch, but it's really not sufficient. Going for a walk doesn't unfortunately increase your VO2 max or put on muscle mass.

When we're really talking about the playbook around maximising our brain health routine, we're going to need to do more strenuous exercise. If I were to say the next two things that we need to consider in our toolkit here, I would chalk it up to ensuring as often as possible that you get an excellent night of sleep and that you're metabolically as healthy as possible. So to recap, here are all the labs we've mentioned so far.

Now that you understand the basics of the four horsemen, how they kill you and how you can face them, in part two of this series, we're going to take a deeper dive into how you can actually train to make these improvements in your life.