Now that you've learned about the four horsemen, you have a good sense of what biomarkers are and some of the nuances between them. And hopefully we've even had a chance to do a couple of tests at home. Let's go a little deeper into this and figure out how to put all of this knowledge into action.

There is no intervention that we have control over that's going to produce a longer and better life than making exercise a regular part of our life. It will help you delay the arrival of the four horsemen. But I think there's a more emotional argument here, which is to kind of imagine the last decade of your life.

That's something I call the marginal decade. When I talk to patients about this idea of the marginal decade, I don't like to rush the discussion. In fact, it's usually a series of discussions because I think you almost have to plant the seed with somebody and let them think about it for a while.

We actually want people to identify 10 very specific things that are going to matter most to them as it pertains to their physical body in the final decade of life. This is what I call the centenarian decathlon. Some of these are activities of daily living.

Some of these are unique physical challenges. Some of these are specific athletic things you want to be able to do, such as ski or play paddle ball. Do you want to be able to live alone or live with your spouse and care for yourself and others without assistance? You have to be able to open a jar on your own.

You have to be able to put groceries in a fridge. You have to be able to wash dishes. You have to be able to sit on a toilet and stand up on your own.

You have to be able to get into and out of a bed on your own and probably walk up and down a flight of stairs. You might also reflect on it through the lens of your children. And what are the things that you would want to do with those grandkids when you're now 30 or 40 years older than you currently are? Now, as I see it, you have two choices.

Armed with that knowledge, you can do nothing and you can let nature take its course. And for most people, that means a pretty painful marginal decade. The other choice is to say, I'm going to do something about this.

And that something might be a little painful in the short run. You might be one of those people who says, I just don't love exercise. I would encourage you to say, you know what? It's okay.

Because what you're going to absolutely love is the freedom that a healthy body brings you in your marginal decade. So regardless of which camp you're in, the sooner you can define with specificity what it is you want to do in your marginal decade, the more likely you'll be able to, A, create a training plan that is geared towards the specific activities. And B, and more importantly, more likely you'll be able to achieve them.

Make a list of five to 10 things you want to be able to do in your last decade. And later on in this series, I'm going to show you some exercises to help. Everything that you're going to want to do later in life can be broken down into a series of measurable, trainable feats that you would want to be able to do all the way until you get there.

In this part of the series, we'll cover more closely exercise, nutrition, sleep, pharmacology, and emotional health. So any programme that's going to be geared towards helping you achieve these goals is going to have to be built on a foundation of cardiorespiratory fitness. Strength and stability.

And even within that branch of cardiorespiratory fitness, we really think of there being two parts, an aerobic base and an aerobic peak. Both aerobic efficiency and VO2 max are really important parts of training the cardiorespiratory system. VO2 max is the maximum aerobic capacity of the heart as determined by the maximum oxygen uptake.

The VO2 max is a very interesting physiologic test. Now to understand it, you have to understand what ventilation of oxygen or VO2 means in the first place. As I sit here right now, the only reason I'm alive is because I am able to consume oxygen and deliver it to all the organs in my body.

And you can imagine that if I were to go for a slow jog, I would need to consume more oxygen because my muscles would be doing more than they're doing at the moment. And ultimately, if I were to run about as fast as I could, you would see an even greater degree of oxygen consumption. But at some point, the amount of oxygen that my muscles would be able to consume based largely on how much oxygen my heart and lungs were able to deliver would hit a plateau or a maximum.

It turns out that wearable devices aren't really good at predicting VO2 max. We prefer to rely on the gold standard test, which is, of course, the test itself. Some gyms do offer this service, and this is a test that I recommend people do, perhaps as often as every year.

VO2 max is a test that we do every year. The good news is, even if you don't have access to a facility to do a VO2 max test, there are tests that you can do yourself to approximate it. Now, one such test is called the Cooper test, where you go to a high school track and you run as fast and hard as you can for 12 minutes.

And the distance you cover gets plugged into a formula, and that formula will tell you a very good estimate of your VO2 max. Refer to the class guide for the formula to calculate your VO2 max, based on your Cooper test result. If you want to know how your VO2 max stacks up across the population, there are tables you can look at.

And these tables will show, by sex and by decade, what percentile you're at. So now that you know about VO2 max, let's talk about aerobic efficiency. We're going to spend much more time training to be as aerobically efficient as possible.

So the more cardio training you do, the more you are increasing the insulin sensitivity of your muscles. And the more insulin sensitive your muscles are, the better you dispose of glucose, the better your metabolic health, the lower your risk of all diseases, all chronic metabolic diseases. There really is not an or here between cardio and resistance training.

It's an and. We must do both of these. And everybody is going to have one that they like a little bit more than the other.

But these have to both be taken together. Have you ever met a person in the final years of their life who said, I wish I had less strength? I'm still waiting to meet that person. It's very difficult to build muscle and strength without resistance.

And sometimes that resistance can be gravity. So a pull up or a push up can be very effective. But for the most part, you need more than your body weight to generate a sufficient enough training stimulus to either produce growth or at least maintenance of muscle mass and to increase strength, which is the thing we care even more about.

Now, most people are pretty familiar with cardio training and resistance training for strength. So the stability idea might be a little bit novel. It becomes ever more increasingly important as we age because the very act of ageing robs us of many of the things that increase our stability.

I think people well understand that our balance deteriorates. But why is that happening? What is it about ageing that reduces balance? Well, part of it is actually that the musculature in our lower leg becomes less and less reactive. It's exactly why people are more prone to falls when they get older.

You know, in many ways, stability, you could view as the legs of the table. I think it's the thing that is essential for safe strength training. And it's the thing that is essential for safe cardio training.

Whether we're talking about swimming, cycling, running, any of these things can be injurious if the underlying system is not stable. So here are some tests that you can do at home right now as a way to gauge the baseline of your strength, stability, and cardio performance. When it comes to cardio, we're going to talk about Zone 2 and VO2 max training.

An individual is probably at the ceiling of their Zone 2 when they are doing steady-state aerobic activity, and they are just at the cusp of finding it uncomfortable to speak in full sentences. So I will say to somebody, if you're exercising on a treadmill, on a bike, something like that, and you can talk in complete sentences to the person you're next to, and it's not really that distressed, you're probably in Zone 1. Conversely, if you're doing the same thing and you're having a really hard time getting a complete sentence out, you're probably in Zone 3 or higher. You pick a modality that's going to work for you, whether it's riding a bike or walking on an inclined treadmill, and you start to monitor where you're at, how many watts you're able to put out on a bike, or how fast or at what incline you're able to walk on the treadmill while meeting that threshold of Zone 2. Over time, the more you put into it, the more you'll see those numbers improve.

The good news is you don't need to spend 10 hours a week doing this, but you do probably need to spend a few hours a week doing this. So at the other end of the spectrum, you still have to make time each week to train at higher intensities than what you're going to do in Zone 2. As a general rule, you only need to spend about 20% of your total cardio training time at this higher intensity level. What does that look like? VO2 max is optimised by intervals that are somewhere between three and eight minute long intervals with a one-to-one ratio of work to recovery.

So a very common place that I'll start people is at four minute intervals. So that again means I want you to be able to sustain an effort for four minutes. You will then have four minutes to recover before doing it again.

And I'd like to see at least four of those intervals. And as you get fitter, you'll do five, you'll do six. In summation, Zone 2 training builds your aerobic base.

It's closely tied to better metabolic health, mitochondrial function, and insulin sensitivity. Think of it like engine efficiency. Training at a steady low intensity helps you use fat for fuel and improves cardiovascular endurance.

Zone 2 also allows you to accumulate a high amount of training volume without breaking down. It's gentle on the joints and nervous system, making it ideal for consistent progress while minimising overtraining or injury risk. VO2 max training builds your aerobic peak.

It raises your heart and lungs maximum capacity to deliver and use oxygen. Think of it like engine horsepower. Training at higher intensities boosts your top end power, speed, and overall aerobic ceiling.

For strength, we're going to look at a push-up and a wall sit. A push-up is a great measure of upper body strength. Of course, it's not a complete measure.

It only measures sort of the pushing capacity, but it is a measure of strength in your pecs, your deltoids, and your triceps. It's a challenging exercise, but the nice thing about push-ups is that you don't need any equipment. It's a test that is accessible to everybody, and it's also a great way that we can benchmark your strength by looking at how many push-ups you can do.

Weight-bearing exercises like push-ups are an easy way to build strength for those just starting out. Remember, strength is highly correlated with longevity. Here's a guide with standards for women, and here's a guide with standards for men.

You can refer to the class guide to see what's recommended for your age range. An isometric wall sit is an activity where you sit at a wall such that your hips and knees are at 90 degrees. Now, it's called isometric because you're not moving in any direction.

You're just staying put. And once you try this, you'll realise it starts to burn. This exercise strengthens your lower body and core, which is exactly what you need to prevent falls in the future.

Here are the female and male standards for this exercise. It becomes a great benchmark for how strong your lower body is. For stability, we're going to look at a step-up and a one-foot eyes-closed balance test.

So a box step-up is a great exercise because on the way up and on the way down, you're doing something kind of different. And it actually is both a test of strength and stability. Here are the male and female standards for a box step-up.

This is relevant if you want to be able to walk upstairs and, more importantly, downstairs. Remember, more people are going to be injured when they're ageing by falling down a step that they miss rather than falling up a step. Now, for the balance test, there are two things that we can do out of the gate to just make balance more difficult that we can do to challenge ourselves.

The first is limit ourselves to one foot over two, and the second is to remove all visual cues by closing eyes. So by experimenting with how to manipulate these two variables, which is one versus two feet and eyes open versus eyes closed, you're going to very quickly be able to find out where you lie on this spectrum of balance and what you need to do to improve it. And here's a guide to standards for this.

Just like studying for the SAT and taking practise tests, you're going to hope that over time your score goes up. But of course, we're not looking for your score to go up just because you're taking the test over and over again. We're looking for your score to go up because you're doing the underlying work that's reflected in the test.

So now you understand why exercise is so important and you have a sense of where you're at in the key areas of fitness, which pillars you might be good at, which need work. So the question is, how do you go about building a training routine to improve? We'll get into exactly that in part three. For now, let's move on to nutrition.

There's so much noise out there when it comes to thinking about diets. So what are these principles of good nutrition? The first is that whatever diet you choose, you need to be in energy balance. You don't want to be in energy imbalance, which means where you're getting too few calories or where you're getting too many calories.

The second principle of a good diet is it has to have adequate protein. And unfortunately, a lot of people are not getting sufficient enough protein, or if they get enough protein, it's not a high enough quality of protein. This becomes particularly concerning as an individual ages.

The third thing we have to consider is micronutrient balance. Are we getting enough vitamins? Are we getting enough minerals? Various diets, especially diets that tend to be more or less restrictive, come at odds with this principle. And that doesn't mean that you can't be on a restrictive diet.

It just means you have to be aware of what its blind spot is and what deficiencies you might have, and therefore if you need to supplement them. I think you want to ask yourself three questions. When you know the answers to these questions, you generally know what direction you need to go in nutritionally.

The first is, am I overnourished or am I undernourished, right? So this is something that you can generally get through a combination of knowing your BMI and the results from your DEXA scan. The second question is, am I metabolically healthy? Again, the biomarker question is really one that we get answers from looking at the blood-based biomarkers along with the Zone 2 test. So an individual that is insulin sensitive, that has a good Zone 2 performance, that's a very metabolically healthy person.

The third question is, am I adequately muscled or not? And again, that's something you're going to largely get off the DEXA scanner. There are plenty of people who are what we call skinny fat, so they actually look pretty lean on the outside, but on the inside they've actually got quite a bit of fat, and that doesn't show up on the scale, but it does on the DEXA scan. This is an individual who really needs exercise more than anything else.

They need adequate protein, they need adequate calories to support that, and truthfully, this is one of the more difficult scenarios to treat. We want to be eating somewhere between 1.6 and 2 grammes of protein per kilogramme of ideal body weight, so an individual who's getting 1.6 grammes of protein per kilo of body weight might still only amount to 15, at most 20 percent of their calories coming from protein. So somewhere between 75 to 85 percent of their total calories are still going to come in the form of fat and carbohydrate.

So for some people, that's going to be a diet that's relatively high in fat and low in carbohydrates. For some people, it's going to be the exact opposite of that. But we have to always kind of come back to these principles of, are we metabolically healthy when we're doing this? Are we in energy balance? Is this diet sustainable? In periods of high stress and sleep deprivation, we tend to undergo cravings for exactly the wrong kinds of food.

So we tend to seek out simple sugars to try to satiate our hunger. And when I meet an individual who is a metabolic train wreck, and I learn that they're sleeping five hours a night every single night, I'm not, frankly, very interested in trying to get them to exercise more or make dramatic changes in their diet absent trying to fix their sleep. And that becomes the single most important thing I want to work on.

Helping people address poor sleep is actually something that over the past few years has given me ever-increasing joy. I've come to realise virtually everyone, despite what their personal narrative is around how bad their sleep is, can be helped, and that most of the help is actually achievable through behavioural modification. Now wake-up time is the most important one to fix.

And if you fix wake-up time, you're generally going to start to get bedtime into a relatively close level as well. So if you say, I'm going to be waking up at 5.30 every morning, then you wake up at 5.30 every morning, and you get out of that bed at 5.30. You don't snooze. You don't lay in bed and read your phone.

You don't play patty cakes. You get up and you get out. And what should happen over time is that will start to anchor your bedtime because you're going to be building up a comparable amount of sleep pressure every day so that hopefully bedtime becomes around maybe 9.30. Which leads to the second point, which is I really want people to make approximately eight hours to be in bed per night.

Now why do I say that? Because the data have consistently shown that most people need approximately seven to eight hours of sleep a night. A really good place to start is making eight hours for sleep because you don't sleep every minute you're in bed. That gets to the third thing that I recommend, which is the room must be dark and it must be cool.

What we really want to avoid in our room is any artificial light. We don't want to have clocks that are bright. We don't want to have electronics in the room.

I recommend people don't even sleep with a phone in their room unless it's absolutely necessary. Temperature is important and again it's something that I think people sometimes struggle with because it can be a little uncomfortable initially when you get into bed and that bed is cool. But we understand that the body really needs to go through a cooling process to enter deep and restorative sleep.

What I think is a bigger problem than the light emanating from the phone is the stimulation that's emanating from the phone. Whether it be getting caught up in work emails or looking at social media or doing things that are kind of stressing you out a little bit as opposed to winding you down. So I think it's important to come up with a wind down routine and again it can involve any order of things around how and when you wash your face or take a shower or brush your teeth or just spending time with your spouse.

Another part of the sleep formula is being very mindful of food and alcohol. Now both of these things in your system at the time you go to bed are going to really make a negative impact on your ability to sleep well and with the ubiquity of sleep trackers that we have everywhere I'm sure everybody with a sleep tracker has already observed this. Boy you wouldn't believe what happened to my sleep numbers when I had you know two glasses of wine before bed last night.

So I think people are well aware that their heart rate goes up their heart rate variability goes down their body temperature goes up and their overall quality of sleep goes down. So what I say to people is if you need to drink make sure you're doing it more than three hours before bed. Try to limit it to one drink a night and ideally don't eat before bed.

For an even deeper dive on sleep I recommend checking out the masterclass from my friend and sleep expert Dr. Matthew Walker. The world of supplements is kind of the wild wild west. The thing that obviously differentiates supplements from pharmacologic drugs is that they're not regulated at all.

It's not uncommon for a patient to come and see me who has a list of supplements that's longer than six pages. So I usually send them away with a homework assignment which is I want you to answer these questions for these supplements and then let's together go through the exercise of determining if it makes sense. So the first question I ask is what is the theoretical benefit of this supplement.

Is it helping you live longer by reducing the risk of one of the diseases that kills us or is it helping you live better by improving your physical health span your cognitive health span emotional health span. Another important question is there any biomarker that we can use to track the utility of this supplement. Unfortunately the answer to this question is almost always no.

But for most people if they take an honest assessment of those questions they usually end up getting rid of most of the supplements they're taking. Now again I'm not opposed to supplements at all and I think that there's a plenty of opportunities to use supplements to help with all sorts of things. And to get even more specific let me take you through some examples of supplements that are widely used and whether they are necessary for longevity.

I tend to shy away from multivitamins. They tend to have too many things in them that you don't necessarily need and they often don't have enough of the things you do need. Creatine is a pretty valuable supplement.

I think it's probably as close to what I could say is a supplement that almost everybody would benefit from to the tune of about five grammes a day. I would put magnesium in a very similar category to creatine though I think there's much more variability about how people should consume it. Most people are probably walking around with not enough magnesium in their system.

There's a reasonable amount of evidence to suggest that the two omega-3 fatty acids that are found in fatty fish EPA and DHA have a number of health benefits particularly around heart health and brain health. Now there have been a number of clinical trials that have looked at this and they've had kind of mixed results but when you take all of the results together the net benefit appears to be positive for both. GLP-1 agonists such as semaglutide perhaps better known as Ozempic are a class of drugs that have obviously taken the world by storm over the past few years.

These are of course not supplements. They have really revolutionised for a first time ever pharmacologic management of obesity. To me the interesting question around these and the long term question is not so much their efficacy around weight loss but their efficacy around managing type 2 diabetes.

It would be entirely understandable to minimise or outright ignore the role of emotional health in the pursuit of longevity. But I would ask you to consider one simple question. What would be the benefit of living longer or living physically better if you're unhappy? I think for most people if they're being brutally honest and they consider this scenario come to the pretty quick conclusion that life without emotional health is really not that rewarding.

One of the most exciting parts of ageing is that while my body and my mind are slowing emotional health is actually one that does not need to decline with age. And so I think we want to take a moment and sort of rejoice in that fact and say you know quite frankly for many people this is one that hits rock bottom somewhere in the 40s. So those of us who can either remember what it was like to be in our 40s which is certainly when I would say mine hit rock bottom or who are on the other side of their 40s don't despair.

It can get a lot better. So what I like to think about when I'm contemplating emotional health is maybe a little less around lifespan benefits and focus more on the apparent and quite frankly intuitive healthspan benefits. There are many tools out there to help you think about managing your own emotional health.

And one I want to talk about today is our inner critical voice. Most people don't realise they have an inner monologue. That's one of the challenges of the fact that our brains never shut up.

We are constantly thinking. Some people, myself included, have adopted a somewhat negative inner voice, a voice that's very critical. Nothing is ever good enough.

Every mistake is amplified. No success is celebrated. And there's a total and utter lack of forgiveness for oneself.

The exercise that I was coached into doing was one in which every time I did something that would incite the rage of my inner monologue, I was directed to pull out my phone and record a voice memo out loud to a friend who had just done the same thing that I had done. So for example, if I am cooking dinner and I burn something, that would have normally been something where I would have got very upset at myself. But instead, I would, in that moment, pull out my phone and record a memo as though my friend, my dear friend, had just burnt dinner.

And how would I show that person compassion? It's difficult to rewire your brain. But when I started this exercise in May of 2020, and as May turned into June, turned into July, turned into August, and you've got to remember, I'm doing this three or four times a day, I noticed something. I didn't hear that voice anymore.

I've learned a sense of compassion that had eluded me most of my life. You know, I've been on this journey for a long time now, both personally and professionally. And fortunately, I'm evolving a lot.

There was a day when I thought that nutrition and exercise were the only things that mattered. Wouldn't have even crossed my mind to get so deep in the weeds of sleep. There was certainly a day when I didn't think that emotional health mattered at all, and that this was really more formulaic and more of a physiology problem, and that some of those softer topics didn't matter.

I suppose I'm not particularly ashamed of the fact that my views on things are in a constant state of evolution. And if anything, it gives me a sense of excitement because I know that in 10 years, I'm going to look at this in an even different and hopefully much more evolved and efficacious way that I'm looking at it today. In the final part of this series, we're going to focus on some very specific exercise videos that you're going to be able to use to help you develop your own exercise training programme to achieve your goals, regardless of your starting fitness level.