Welcome to the practical application of this series. We're here to talk about how you can actually put into practise many of the things we've discussed around exercise. Because of course, if you gathered by now, I think exercise is probably the single most important tool that you can unleash, not only in an effort to live a longer life, but perhaps more importantly, to live a better life. 

In this episode, we will give you a brief overview of some exercises you can do based on your fitness level, whether you're a beginner or more advanced. As always, more information is available in our class guide. Now, to help me do all of this, I've recruited one of my colleagues, Dan Cerrone. 

Dan and I have worked together for five or six, maybe seven years now. And Dan heads the exercise programme in our medical practise. I got started in the industry working with pro athletes. 

And to be honest, I got bored of it really quickly, just because for me, there was not much value added there. But the one thing that I was connected with was the fact that athletes always train with this high degree of specificity. And in this one facility I worked at, we also had a group of adult clientele that came in during the off-peak hours. 

That really spoke to me from a value standpoint, because taking people who are in their 40s, 50s, 60s, and showing them that they can engage in their environment and start to live a more fruitful life. As they start to build strength, resilience, and cardiorespiratory function, that was something that was very valuable to me. So there are four concepts that I think are worth discussing before we jump into the training programme. 

And many of you may already be familiar with some of these, but I think it's worth going over them. The first is the idea of how we measure the intensity of what we're doing. There are different ways to do it, but the way we prefer to think about it is when doing resistance training, we like to think of it in terms of reps in reserve. 

So Dan, explain how you think about reps in reserve and how you instruct people to do a given number of reps. Do you just say to somebody, hey, we're going to do 10 reps no matter what? No, I mean, the easiest way to think about it is, let's say you do a set of bicep curls to keep it simple. And at the end of that set, just thinking to yourself intuitively, how many more reps could I have done at that weight? And if it's something greater than two, odds are that's not a sufficient stimulus to maximise strength and muscle growth. 

So that just means that that's opportunity for you to push a little bit harder. So typically with reps in reserve, we want to keep that close to the one to two rep range. So if you were going for 10 reps, that last couple of the reps should feel like you could barely hit one rep or two reps left in the tank. 

Yeah. And I think the reason we emphasise one to two reps in reserve is it's that sweet spot of both safety and efficacy. The data show that being at one to two reps in reserve produces the same benefits as going to failure, but with less risk. 

And for cardio training, we use RPE just as a different framework to guide intensity, just because RPE is a little bit more variable day to day. So what I like to talk to patients about is using this concept of the talk test, where if you're doing your zone two work, as you get 10-15 minutes into that bout, you're going to hit a point where you start to have this internal monologue. If Peter was right next to me right now, can I still have a conversation with him? Yeah, probably. 

Would that still be a straight conversation? That's where you want to say yes to. And I recommend actually people talk out loud. An easy way to do this if you're on a bike or a treadmill is phone a friend. 

So when you're in the middle of that zone two test, dial a friend. You've probably got your headset on and just see how it feels to have that discussion. And if you can have that discussion pretty easily, you're probably in zone one. 

If you can't speak, even in a complete sentence, you're outside of zone two. Zone two is often called the sweet spot because it gives you the biggest return for the least stress. Everyone's a little different, but aiming for a few hours of zone two each week, or roughly 80% of your total cardio training, is a great target for long-term health and endurance. 

The next idea we want to talk about is how do we measure progress? How do we advance progress in the weight room, on the bike, on the treadmill? And it's this idea of progressive overload. Why is this such an important idea as we want to make sure that we are constantly improving? I think the best way to think about it is we always want to have the stimulus that forces our bodies to adapt. I think it's really easy for a lot of people to get into the habit of going to the gym and doing something, which is a fantastic place to start. 

But what they lose is that insight of every single time I've been here, I should be looking to do just a little bit more. And in terms of progressive overload, how most people think about it, they think about it just simply in terms of sets, reps, or weight. But I think an easier framework to think about is looking at the total volume of the work that you're doing. 

So I think it's very easy for individuals to fall into this fallacy where they start to only try to increase their weight, instead of toggling back and forth between both reps and weight, or even manipulating another variable, such as time under tension, which is basically how long is it taking you to complete that exercise? So if you're doing a set of 10 reps of bicep curls, and you're doing a two-second lowering phase, one-second concentric phase where you're contracting the muscle, that's going to take you about 30 seconds to do that set ballpark. But if, let's say, you hit a wall in terms of the amount of weight you can use or how many reps you can do, another way to impact or increase the intensity there is to slow it down that lowering phase, taking it from two seconds to three seconds, which is another form of progressive overload. So the third concept we want to talk about is the idea of doing these wonky, quote-unquote, stability exercises as a part of our warm-up. 

Now, many people are probably thinking, hey look, I know how to warm up. You know, I go into the gym, I foam roll for a few minutes, I do a couple jumping jacks, I'm ready to go. Why is it that we go through the paces of putting our patients through a lot of movement preparation? The best way to think about it is that the prep you're doing before your main lifts or your main workout that day is really setting the table for what you're going to be able to achieve. 

So warming up beforehand prepares your body for the exercises you're about to do versus going in cold off of it or not doing something that's specific towards what you're doing in the gym. I think a good framework is whatever lift that you're doing that day, your stability or movement prep movements should somewhat emulate that main lift to prepare your nervous system for what it's going to be doing to produce a lot of load or a lot of force or whatever it is that you're going after. Yeah, so my warm-up before a leg day, my warm-up before back and chest, they look totally different.

Yeah. Okay, so the final thing that we want to talk about is really about time efficiency. Supersets significantly boost time efficiency in strength training by having you perform two exercises back to back with minimal rest. 

I think the best way to think about it is you want to do the opposite with a superset of whatever the first movement is that you did. So if you're doing a push-up, you want to do some type of row variation. And the value add there is you're not creating this interference effect between the two movements that you're doing.

So yes, there is going to be a little bit of cumulative fatigue going from the first exercise to the second exercise. But I've seen multiple different ways that people programme supersets of doing something like a chest press and then a chest fly, which becomes somewhat redundant, because you're already stimulating that muscle group during the first exercise. And if you're following the concepts of reps and reserve, you're pretty fatigued then going to that second exercise. 

First, if you pair that chest press with something like a row, where those tissues that weren't really overly involved in that chest press are still fresh to be able to move the load and contract and elongate to stimulate growth. So bicep and tricep, obviously chest and back, quad and hamstring for doing isolated exercises. These are some of the ways that we can do that. 

Yeah. Okay. Now that you know the basic rules, let's discuss how we can put this into practise based on what fitness level you're at. 

First, we're going to start with a path that's designed for those of you that perhaps haven't exercised at all, or maybe exercised at one point in your life, but have gotten away from it. The second path is for those of you who are already exercising, but maybe you're exercising without the specificity that I've talked about. We want to be able to redirect you, so to speak, and not necessarily undo anything you're doing, but just make sure that you're getting the most bang for your buck. 

One of the great advantages of starting from zero is that you're going to experience the greatest relative increase in performance and health benefits. And this is even greater than an individual who's already exercising, who's going to add more exercise to what they're doing. So keep in the back of your mind that you're really embarking on something that's going to be transformative for your health. 

Even if you do currently exercise, it's good to go over this information and make sure you're building on the right foundation. Our goal here is to make sure you don't get injured. Our goal here is to make sure you enjoy this. 

And our goal here is to make sure that you build a new set of habits and routines around doing this, such that a year from now, you're looking back and you're going to be saying, man, I can't believe there was a day when I didn't exercise regularly. Dan, when you think about this in our practise, because we do have patients that come into our practise who explicitly can't stand exercise or have never done it before, they've maybe thought a little bit about their nutrition, but not about exercise. What are the things that you are looking to do specifically with those patients? I think the biggest thing is simply just starting with really basic habit formation. 

Just get in the rhythm of doing something consistently two to three times a week to build that habit and start to get that dopamaternic response out of that, because that goes a long way. Just getting to the gym one to two days a week is increasing your volume by a hundred to two hundred percent of what you were doing before that. One of the most commonly asked questions I receive when it comes to people who haven't exercised is, hey, I get that I need to kind of do this cardio thing. 

Do I need to be doing all of those intense intervals? And usually I say not to start. Quite frankly, if you're completely new to doing cardio training, I prefer to start you doing just zone two. The reason for it is I want to build up a bit of an aerobic base in you. 

The good news is because you're deconditioned, you're actually going to get VO2 max type conditioning out of even an aerobic base workout. So there'll be plenty of time to increase both the complexity and the intensity of your cardio training. But out of the gate, we want to, again, build some muscle memory. 

If I could get you doing two or three 30-minute low-intensity sessions a week, I think we've won the game. So Dan, what kind of things do you work with patients on inside the gym versus outside the gym? One of the biggest things, honestly, outside of the gym is I think a lot of people don't realise how many opportunities there are to engage in exercise when you're not in the gym setting. So as corny as it sounds, doing something small like parking a little bit further away when you go to the grocery store or deciding to take the flight up the stairs instead of taking the elevator or the escalator, taking your dog for a little bit longer walk, these things start to compound it out over time. 

And they're just great ways, even though it's not deliberate exercise, you're still getting more exercise in your life. You'll probably know when it's time to progress based on a couple of things. First of all, you'll probably appreciate that you're making progress.

And again, this is in that spirit of progressive overload. So maybe when you started out on the bike, you were only able to hold 75 watts and stay in zone two. But six months later, you might be at 125 watts. 

That's an enormous increase in your capacity. That's probably the sign that you're ready to progress. Another sign that you're ready to progress simply is going to be the appetite to do so. 

So what's going to happen is as you develop confidence and as you develop some of that physiologic capacity, your appetite for pushing a little bit harder on occasion will exist. And what I typically recommend in a situation like that is maybe you end each zone two workout with a burst of three or four minutes at a much higher tempo. So you're not going straight to longer workouts that are dedicated around intensity, but you're just adding little bits of intensity at the end of a workout at that tail end. 

And you're sort of proving to yourself, hey, I might have done this zone two workout at 125 watts, but look, I was able to hold 175 watts for a few minutes at the end of each of those days. The key is to start with lighter weights and focus on proper form, really perfecting the movement of each exercise. It's better to build a strong foundation than push too hard and risk injury. 

That's the core principle here. So Dan, when you're telling somebody for the first time, hey, I want you to go and do this exercise, we're going to do chest presses on a machine. And they say to you, how many reps should I do? 10, 12, 8? What are you telling them? So I'm telling them to keep it somewhere between 8 to 12 reps. 

And again, we want to target that two rep reserve range. So it's helpful to think about that two rep reserve framework for that last set of what you're doing. Because if you still have two reps left in reserve on the last set of that exercise, that's then a good signal that next week you can go up and wait a little bit more than you did this week. 

And three to four sets for all exercises is a great starting point. You can perform that volume one to two times per week, even pushing to three if you're doing full body workouts instead of leg days or upper body days. So if somebody doesn't have you right next to them telling them what weight to put on for that first set, what's a safe way to think about doing that and progressing? So I think obviously we want to make sure that form is front and centre of what we're doing. 

So we don't want to chase weight, sacrificing form. You want to make sure again that we're targeting our tissues, our joints, our ligaments and the way that are designed to be targeted for that exercise. So I say keep things a little bit lighter from the get go. 

And then as you get more comfortable with whatever movement it is that you're engaging with, then slowly start to increase the weight. And that might mean it might take four to six weeks for someone to actually understand what two reps in reserve feels like, but that's perfectly okay. Here's an example of how you can ramp up with goblet squats. 

Now that you understand the principles and how to ramp up, here's a demo of some more simple strength exercises you can do on day one. So now we're going to have Peter demonstrate a pretty simple superset where he's going to do a horizontal press and a horizontal pull movement. And we're going to start with a dumbbell press, which he's going to grab a dumbbell in each hand. 

And now we're going to have him lay down on the bench. You've noticed he's maintaining a nice, smooth, controlled tempo. He's doing a great job of keeping his wrists stacked over his elbows on the way down, not letting those dumbbells kick out or kick in. 

And he's maintaining a nice, good cadence here, so he's able to maintain stability through his trunk, which gives a great foundation to press upon. So we're going to have him do two more reps here, which is put him close to one rep in reserve as we talked about. And we're going to move on to the banded row after this. 

And now he just finished that set. And now we're going to go into the complete opposing muscle group, which is our back muscles in that same plane of motion. So we're going to have him grab the handle here.

And we're going to make sure you're maintaining a nice upright torso and posture. The focus here is keeping a nice tall crown of the head, pulling the shoulder blades back to the spine, but also getting a nice, big reach and a stretch in those back muscles as we're returning back to that start position. And one thing to watch out for anytime you're doing a row variation is pay attention to what's happening at the shoulder. 

If the shoulder starts to round forward inside the socket, that's creating stress that we don't want on that joint. So we want to make sure the shoulder blade is staying right in line with the shoulder itself. One thing, if you're doing this at home too, with bands especially is the greater the length of the band, the more resistance you're going to get. 

So if you're doing this at home, and this feels a little bit easy, you can just slide back a little bit further. And it's going to create more of a challenge for you because we're increasing the band resistance itself, since we're not using cables or any other external weight here. So the third idea is that of using stability exercises specifically as part of your warmup.

So there are exercises that we can do, single leg exercises, balance exercises, eye closed exercises, that are helpful to train and retrain to have stability so that you can move through the world safely. Stability, of course, plays a role in the neck, in the back, in the hips, in the knees, all of these areas where we're more and more likely to experience injuries as we age. And we have to work much harder to strengthen muscles around these vital structures so that we don't succumb to these types of injuries. 

One of the biggest concepts is to think about whatever activity it is that is important to you into your marginal decade, kind of reverse engineering what joint actions are involved in that. If it's something like putting your luggage and overhead bin by yourself, you need a certain degree of shoulder range of motion, you need a certain amount of trunk stability. Remember, stability is the foundation for us.

Don't skip these when you're training. How does a beginner start a stability training programme and ramp it up? Here's a demo of a simple stability exercise you can do on day one. So what Peter is going to demonstrate here in a couple of seconds is an exercise that sounds incredibly silly in its name, but is very important for a foundational component.

And he's going to do what's called a dead bug, which is kind of exactly what it sounds like. But the dead bug is a great exercise because it allows individuals to learn what it's like to stabilise through their trunk while moving their limbs independently. So what Peter's going to do is he's going to bring his feet up off the floor. 

So his hips and knees are at about a 90 degree angle here. Then he's going to reach his hands towards the ceiling with his palms facing in towards each other. We're going to have him give a nice bigger reach to the shoulder blades, like he's trying to reach his fingertips towards the ceiling. 

And now all that's going to happen here is he's going to lower one leg towards the floor and then the opposite hand towards the floor. We're going to exhale as we're lowering towards the floor to make sure we're not getting too much extension to the lower back. So we're stabilising through the trunk here. 

And then he's going to inhale to come back to the start position and alternate sides. So as he's moving through this movement, we're stabilising through the trunk and teaching the arms and the legs how to move independently, which is incredibly important for any movements that involve those body parts to make sure we're not creating compensatory actions as we're loading those tissues. So typically we do the dead bug for one to two sets anywhere from six to ten reps per side. 

You really just want to go until you start to notice that your body's either starting to compensate or you're unable to maintain that same position and execution for the movement. For more exercises, as well as custom weekly workout plans, make sure to look at our class guide. There are going to be those of you who are incredibly active. 

You do a whole bunch of activities, but you might not really be spending that much time in the gym. You might not be spending that much time doing dedicated focused cardio. You're probably saying, look, I don't know that my training has the specificity that Peter spoke about. 

I don't know that what I'm doing today is setting me up to have the best marginal decade. If you're not training with specificity, you probably won't be able to do everything you want to do when you reach your 80s and 90s. So Dan, we get a lot of patients like this in our practise as well. 

These are people who come in, they're really fit. What are the most important things that you're trying to communicate to those patients as you look to redirect and apply a greater lens of specificity? I think first and foremost, it comes down to injury risk. If you're someone who's doing a lot of recreational activities, golf, tennis, pickleball, whatever it is, we know that there is some inherent risk with those activities. 

So that's first and foremost, is recognise what injuries can occur during some of these activities and what can we do inside of the gym to make you more resilient and prepare yourself for things that you like to do outside of the gym. And the good news is you don't have to take them to the operating room to fix it. You can just change the way they're training to correct it. 

When it comes to cardio, you need to prioritise two things, zone 2 training and VO2 max training. Dan, another question we get asked all the time, especially by people who are quite active in sports is, look, I'm playing two hours of tennis a week and I wear a sports watch when I do it and it's showing me by heart rate that I'm in zone 2 for 45 minutes or even an hour of those two hours. Do I really need to do more than that? Yeah, I mean when you're doing something like that, odds are you're also fluctuating in and out of zone 1, zone 3, zone 4, maybe even zone 5. So yeah, you might be accumulating 45 minutes of zone 2 volume across the entire hour and a half you're playing tennis or pickleball, but the reality is, again, we want to come back to this concept of specificity and we wanted to drive specificity from an aerobic standpoint, which is we want to find our zone 2 and kind of park ourselves there because that's we get the majority of the benefit. 

And really the other idea here is we want to do this specific training because we can control what we're doing. We always test our patients out of the gate for their VO2 max so we know right away exactly where they stand and sometimes patients come into our practise doing a lot of high intensity training and they're disappointed that their VO2 max is maybe only at the 80th percentile where they think they ought to be at the 99th percentile. So how do we take a person like that and coach them up to be in the top one percent? So one of the biggest things that people make the mistake of is conflating hard work with high intensity intervals from an aerobic standpoint. 

You want to spend a good amount of time at close to your max heart rate. For most people that's around 90 percent of their heart rate max or higher and we want to see that at about three minutes bare minimum, even anywhere up to six to seven minutes in some cases. Yeah, so what we've really got to do is get people to train if they want that to be their goal. 

If they want to be in the top one percent, they've got to build a really wide aerobic base. That means 80 percent of that cardio time needs to be roughly in zone two and that remaining 20 percent of time has to be doing those intervals that are often longer than what people are used to in that three to seven or eight minute range. Yeah. 

Dan, a lot of times our patients who have been gym rats say look I'm kind of frustrated like I haven't made any gains in years. What is your most common diagnosis in a situation like that? I mean the biggest thing honestly is just a lack of progressive overload where they might have only been doing three sets of that exercise for five reps and you never tried to add more volume by adding in a fourth set and then once they do they realise oh you know what that'll actually allow me to go up and wait the next week. Yeah, so it's again you can add more weight, you can add more reps, you can add more sets, you can decrease the rest, you can increase time under tension. 

There are so many ways that one can progressively overload but unfortunately without some form of progressive overload progress is very difficult. Here's a demo of a more advanced strength exercise you can work into your routine. So the next two exercises we're going to show as a superset are a deadlift variation and a pull-up variation. 

So Peter's going to start with a kettlebell deadlift and we're going to have him set up so he's directly over the top of that kettlebell so that kettlebell is almost directly underneath his centre of mass. He's going to start by creating a soft bend in his knees and reaching his hips back allowing the chest to fall forward slightly. So this isn't a squat pattern, this is a hinge pattern which is the complete opposite where the hips are moving back and the chest is falling forward slightly and then push the feet into the floor to drive away from the ground and then lowering back down those hips are going to clear back, chest is going to fall and kettlebell is going to stay directly underneath him the entire time here. 

Kettlebell deadlifts or any other variation are incredibly important for basic tasks like picking up boxes and moving things. If we hinge properly we can use our legs to help us perform the task versus using our lower back to help support that. So another variation you can do if you don't have a kettlebell handy at home is to actually just pull up a dumbbell and instead of having it horizontally you're going to have it vertically. 

Same principles apply here where he's pushing into the floor to drive the hips forward and up and that weight is staying nice and close to the midline the entire time but the legs are doing the majority of the work here and then lats are helping to keep tension in the spine as well. And now he's going to pair that with a pull-up variation. So this is a band assisted pull-up variation and we're using the band here because the most challenging position for most people when they do a pull-up correctly is that bottom position because that's when our tissues are more elongated so we're getting a little bit of assistance here. 

He's going to grab the bar right about shoulder width apart we're going to make sure that he's not overextending through his spine he's keeping a little bit of a stability by keeping his rib cage down on the front side here and then to initiate the pull we're just driving the elbows down towards the hips. Notice how he's not leaning back as he pulls up he's not letting his head push forward at all so he's keeping his entire body in as a straight line moving everything up and down as a unit. If you don't have access to a bar or a rack like this where you can use a band setup you can also attach it to the top of the bar by looping it around to perform the same thing if you have a pull-up bar at home for example. 

And in terms of programming this or how many sets and reps you're going to do typically I'd recommend around three to four sets six to eight reps for the deadlifts and six to ten reps for the pull-up. For those who are more advanced there are different things to focus on when it comes to stability. You can do more complex movements and the goal here is to enhance your routine. 

Here's a demo of a stability exercise and modifications you can do today. A slightly more advanced stability exercise is what's called a half kneeling pallet press or anti-rotation press. So what Peter's going to do he's going to set up with his inside knee down on the mat so it's going to be right knee down and left knee up.

He's going to grab this band so he's got a band in both hands and he's going to start with that band right in the centre of his sternum. All we're focused on doing here is pressing that band straight out towards my hand like he's punching my hand and getting a nice big reach through the shoulder blades and the further out the hands move from the torso the more he has to fight against that band rotating him pulling him back. So outside of fighting against rotation we're also fighting against the extension of the lower back here because as that band presses out most individuals will also have the tendency to want to arch their spine to find passive support versus leveraging their internal and external obliques to maintain stability at the trunk.

We're also sneaking in a lot of shoulder stability with that press out of the band and pelvic stability with this narrow base of support that he's at on the floor. So Dan let's give folks a sense of why such a strange looking exercise actually brings value in the real world. So anytime we have to stabilise through our trunk our shoulders our hips we also want to have the capacity to be able to resist that rotation from happening otherwise you start to create a lot of stress on the vertebrae of your lumbar spine. 

If you're doing any type of rotational activity whether that's a sport like golf or tennis or even something as basic as gardening outside you need a strong core to then be able to rotate on top of a more stable foundation. So now here are some functional exercises that will help your body maintain strength as you reach your marginal decade. This next exercise is a single leg bridge hold which is a great entry point to challenging pelvic stability which is incredibly important for making sure that your knee isn't getting a brunt of force if you're going up or down stairs to protect that joint and pelvic stability is also incredibly important to allow for adequate trunk stability as well. 

So I think any activity you're doing on one leg running walking sprinting any sport that you're playing pelvic stability is a great foundation component to build on. The incline push-up is incredibly important for everyday activities such as pushing a shopping cart moving furniture or picking up a child. This exercise strengthens your pectoral muscles and triceps helping you maintain the ability to perform these activities as you age. 

Because we're bringing the floor up to you a little bit you can maintain a good position of your spine and your trunk so you're not compensating through your lower back arching or your head pushing forward which can create strain on various aspects of your spine. The overhead shoulder press is important because when we're doing things overhead in day-to-day life whether you're travelling on the aeroplane or putting your luggage in overhead bin whatever it is that you're doing where you require strength to go overhead we want to be able to be strong towards this end range of motion so we're not placing undue strain on your rotator cuff or the ligaments that attach to that site. Stir the pot's a fairly advanced core exercise because it's challenging not just your trunk muscles to make sure you can prevent your lower back from extending but it's also teaching your brain how to respond in real time to environmental changes.

The stability ball is constantly moving around and you have to respond to that change in motion which is exactly how life occurs outside of the gym so doing some things in the gym that are still controlled but slightly more chaotic are beneficial for application outside of the gym as well. The rear foot elevated split squats a single leg version of your traditional squat pattern which is very important for maintaining joint health and preventing overuse patterns over time. We have a narrow base support so we're also sneaking in some more pelvic stability as well as loading the quads the glutes and the hamstrings to actually control and then put force down into the ground to create power and any activity that involves your lower body.

The single leg Romanian deadlift is an incredibly challenging hinge pattern because we're doing it on one leg instead of two legs like the kettlebell deadlifts so that requires a substantial higher degree of pelvic stability as well as hamstring strength and end range control there and oftentimes we tend to avoid this position just because it's not something that the machines in your typical gym setup allow for you to do so that has a lot of carryover into lower leg and foot strength as well as pelvic stability. The swiss dance row is kind of a combination upper body pull and lower body stability exercise because we have this very narrow base support we have to stabilise the pelvis so that rotational movement is important because we're not always living forward to backwards or side to side a lot of activities that we're doing outside of the gym require us to rotate and this motion actually encourages you to be able to rotate through the part of the spine we want to which is your thoracic spine not so much to the part that we don't want to which is your lower back or your lumbar spine. Well that brings us to the end of our episode on exercise and I hope that you now realise that all we've done is taken that missile of yours that's been doing a lot of exercise and applied a guidance system to it so that you now have the specificity of training that is necessary to bring you your dual goals of not just living longer but more importantly living better. 

Remember we have only covered an overview of exercises you can do depending on your fitness level and there are more exercise suggestions and custom weekly workout plans in our class guide. We don't really have control over which disease we ultimately succumb to and some diseases will place us in a more debilitated state than others so I think we can only do what we can do but there's no doubt that what people want most is to be able to enjoy their life and live as independently as possible for as long as possible and this is what we exercise for this is part of what we train for is to be able to do those things physically right up until the end of our life.